The Whisperer in Darkness

I.

Bear in mind closely that I did not see any actual visual horror at the end. To say that a mental
shock was the cause of what I inferred—that last straw which sent me racing out of the
lonely Akeley farmhouse and through the wild domed hills of Vermont in a commandeered motor
at night—is to ignore the plainest facts of my final experience. Notwithstanding the deep
extent to which I shared the information and speculations of Henry Akeley, the things I saw
and heard, and the admitted vividness of the impression produced on me by these things, I cannot
prove even now whether I was right or wrong in my hideous inference. For after all, Akeley’s
disappearance establishes nothing. People found nothing amiss in his house despite the bullet-marks
on the outside and inside. It was just as though he had walked out casually for a ramble in
the hills and failed to return. There was not even a sign that a guest had been there, or that
those horrible cylinders and machines had been stored in the study. That he had mortally feared
the crowded green hills and endless trickle of brooks among which he had been born and reared,
means nothing at all, either; for thousands are subject to just such morbid fears. Eccentricity,
moreover, could easily account for his strange acts and apprehensions toward the last.
The whole matter began, so far as I am concerned, with the historic and unprecedented
Vermont floods of November 3, 1927. I was then, as now, an instructor of literature at Miskatonic
University in Arkham, Massachusetts, and an enthusiastic amateur student of New England folklore.
Shortly after the flood, amidst the varied reports of hardship, suffering, and organised relief
which filled the press, there appeared certain odd stories of things found floating in some
of the swollen rivers; so that many of my friends embarked on curious discussions and appealed
to me to shed what light I could on the subject. I felt flattered at having my folklore study
taken so seriously, and did what I could to belittle the wild, vague tales which seemed so clearly
an outgrowth of old rustic superstitions. It amused me to find several persons of education
who insisted that some stratum of obscure, distorted fact might underlie the rumours.
The tales thus brought to my notice came mostly through newspaper cuttings;
though one yarn had an oral source and was repeated to a friend of mine in a letter from his
mother in Hardwick, Vermont. The type of thing described was essentially the same in all cases,
though there seemed to be three separate instances involved—one connected with the Winooski
River near Montpelier, another attached to the West River in Windham County beyond Newfane,
and a third centring in the Passumpsic in Caledonia County above Lyndonville. Of course many
of the stray items mentioned other instances, but on analysis they all seemed to boil down to
these three. In each case country folk reported seeing one or more very bizarre and disturbing
objects in the surging waters that poured down from the unfrequented hills, and there was a
widespread tendency to connect these sights with a primitive, half-forgotten cycle of whispered
legend which old people resurrected for the occasion.
What people thought they saw were organic shapes not quite like any they had
ever seen before. Naturally, there were many human bodies washed along by the streams in that
tragic period; but those who described these strange shapes felt quite sure that they were not
human, despite some superficial resemblances in size and general outline. Nor, said the witnesses,
could they have been any kind of animal known to Vermont. They were pinkish things about five
feet long; with crustaceous bodies bearing vast pairs of dorsal fins or membraneous wings and
several sets of articulated limbs, and with a sort of convoluted ellipsoid, covered with multitudes
of very short antennae, where a head would ordinarily be. It was really remarkable how closely
the reports from different sources tended to coincide; though the wonder was lessened by the
fact that the old legends, shared at one time throughout the hill country, furnished a morbidly
vivid picture which might well have coloured the imaginations of all the witnesses concerned.
It was my conclusion that such witnesses—in every case naive and simple backwoods folk—had
glimpsed the battered and bloated bodies of human beings or farm animals in the whirling currents;
and had allowed the half-remembered folklore to invest these pitiful objects with fantastic
attributes.
The ancient folklore, while cloudy, evasive, and largely forgotten by the present
generation, was of a highly singular character, and obviously reflected the influence of still
earlier Indian tales. I knew it well, though I had never been in Vermont, through the exceedingly
rare monograph of Eli Davenport, which embraces material orally obtained prior to 1839 among
the oldest people of the state. This material, moreover, closely coincided with tales which
I had personally heard from elderly rustics in the mountains of New Hampshire. Briefly summarised,
it hinted at a hidden race of monstrous beings which lurked somewhere among the remoter hills—in
the deep woods of the highest peaks, and the dark valleys where streams trickle from unknown
sources. These beings were seldom glimpsed, but evidences of their presence were reported by
those who had ventured farther than usual up the slopes of certain mountains or into certain
deep, steep-sided gorges that even the wolves shunned.
There were queer footprints or claw-prints in the mud of brook-margins and
barren patches, and curious circles of stones, with the grass around them worn away, which did
not seem to have been placed or entirely shaped by Nature. There were, too, certain caves of
problematical depth in the sides of the hills; with mouths closed by boulders in a manner scarcely
accidental, and with more than an average quota of the queer prints leading both toward and
away from them—if indeed the direction of these prints could be justly estimated. And
worst of all, there were the things which adventurous people had seen very rarely in the twilight
of the remotest valleys and the dense perpendicular woods above the limits of normal hill-climbing.
It would have been less uncomfortable if the stray accounts of these things
had not agreed so well. As it was, nearly all the rumours had several points in common; averring
that the creatures were a sort of huge, light-red crab with many pairs of legs and with two
great bat-like wings in the middle of the back. They sometimes walked on all their legs, and
sometimes on the hindmost pair only, using the others to convey large objects of indeterminate
nature. On one occasion they were spied in considerable numbers, a detachment of them wading
along a shallow woodland watercourse three abreast in evidently disciplined formation. Once
a specimen was seen flying—launching itself from the top of a bald, lonely hill at night
and vanishing in the sky after its great flapping wings had been silhouetted an instant against
the full moon.
These things seemed content, on the whole, to let mankind alone; though they
were at times held responsible for the disappearance of venturesome individuals—especially
persons who built houses too close to certain valleys or too high up on certain mountains. Many
localities came to be known as inadvisable to settle in, the feeling persisting long after the
cause was forgotten. People would look up at some of the neighbouring mountain-precipices with
a shudder, even when not recalling how many settlers had been lost, and how many farmhouses
burnt to ashes, on the lower slopes of those grim, green sentinels.
But while according to the earliest legends the creatures would appear to have
harmed only those trespassing on their privacy; there were later accounts of their curiosity
respecting men, and of their attempts to establish secret outposts in the human world. There
were tales of the queer claw-prints seen around farmhouse windows in the morning, and of occasional
disappearances in regions outside the obviously haunted areas. Tales, besides, of buzzing voices
in imitation of human speech which made surprising offers to lone travellers on roads and cart-paths
in the deep woods, and of children frightened out of their wits by things seen or heard where
the primal forest pressed close upon their dooryards. In the final layer of legends—the
layer just preceding the decline of superstition and the abandonment of close contact with the
dreaded places—there are shocked references to hermits and remote farmers who at some
period of life appeared to have undergone a repellent mental change, and who were shunned and
whispered about as mortals who had sold themselves to the strange beings. In one of the northeastern
counties it seemed to be a fashion about 1800 to accuse eccentric and unpopular recluses of
being allies or representatives of the abhorred things.
As to what the things were—explanations naturally varied. The common
name applied to them was “those ones”, or “the old ones”, though other
terms had a local and transient use. Perhaps the bulk of the Puritan settlers set them down
bluntly as familiars of the devil, and made them a basis of awed theological speculation. Those
with Celtic legendry in their heritage—mainly the Scotch-Irish element of New Hampshire,
and their kindred who had settled in Vermont on Governor Wentworth’s colonial grants—linked
them vaguely with the malign fairies and “little people” of the bogs and raths,
and protected themselves with scraps of incantation handed down through many generations. But
the Indians had the most fantastic theories of all. While different tribal legends differed,
there was a marked consensus of belief in certain vital particulars; it being unanimously agreed
that the creatures were not native to this earth.
The Pennacook myths, which were the most consistent and picturesque, taught
that the Winged Ones came from the Great Bear in the sky, and had mines in our earthly hills
whence they took a kind of stone they could not get on any other world. They did not live here,
said the myths, but merely maintained outposts and flew back with vast cargoes of stone to their
own stars in the north. They harmed only those earth-people who got too near them or spied upon
them. Animals shunned them through instinctive hatred, not because of being hunted. They could
not eat the things and animals of earth, but brought their own food from the stars. It was bad
to get near them, and sometimes young hunters who went into their hills never came back. It
was not good, either, to listen to what they whispered at night in the forest with voices like
a bee’s that tried to be like the voices of men. They knew the speech of all kinds of
men—Pennacooks, Hurons, men of the Five Nations—but did not seem to have or need
any speech of their own. They talked with their heads, which changed colour in different ways
to mean different things.
All the legendry, of course, white and Indian alike, died down during the nineteenth
century, except for occasional atavistical flareups. The ways of the Vermonters became settled;
and once their habitual paths and dwellings were established according to a certain fixed plan,
they remembered less and less what fears and avoidances had determined that plan, and even that
there had been any fears or avoidances. Most people simply knew that certain hilly regions were
considered as highly unhealthy, unprofitable, and generally unlucky to live in, and that the
farther one kept from them the better off one usually was. In time the ruts of custom and economic
interest became so deeply cut in approved places that there was no longer any reason for going
outside them, and the haunted hills were left deserted by accident rather than by design. Save
during infrequent local scares, only wonder-loving grandmothers and retrospective nonagenarians
ever whispered of beings dwelling in those hills; and even such whisperers admitted that there
was not much to fear from those things now that they were used to the presence of houses and
settlements, and now that human beings let their chosen territory severely alone.
All this I had known from my reading, and from certain folk-tales picked up
in New Hampshire; hence when the flood-time rumours began to appear, I could easily guess what
imaginative background had evolved them. I took great pains to explain this to my friends, and
was correspondingly amused when several contentious souls continued to insist on a possible
element of truth in the reports. Such persons tried to point out that the early legends had
a significant persistence and uniformity, and that the virtually unexplored nature of the Vermont
hills made it unwise to be dogmatic about what might or might not dwell among them; nor could
they be silenced by my assurance that all the myths were of a well-known pattern common to most
of mankind and determined by early phases of imaginative experience which always produced the
same type of delusion.
It was of no use to demonstrate to such opponents that the Vermont myths differed
but little in essence from those universal legends of natural personification which filled the
ancient world with fauns and dryads and satyrs, suggested the kallikanzari of modern
Greece, and gave to wild Wales and Ireland their dark hints of strange, small, and terrible
hidden races of troglodytes and burrowers. No use, either, to point out the even more startlingly
similar belief of the Nepalese hill tribes in the dreaded Mi-Go or “Abominable
Snow-Men” who lurk hideously amidst the ice and rock pinnacles of the Himalayan summits.
When I brought up this evidence, my opponents turned it against me by claiming that it must
imply some actual historicity for the ancient tales; that it must argue the real existence of
some queer elder earth-race, driven to hiding after the advent and dominance of mankind, which
might very conceivably have survived in reduced numbers to relatively recent times—or
even to the present.
The more I laughed at such theories, the more these stubborn friends asseverated
them; adding that even without the heritage of legend the recent reports were too clear, consistent,
detailed, and sanely prosaic in manner of telling, to be completely ignored. Two or three fanatical
extremists went so far as to hint at possible meanings in the ancient Indian tales which gave
the hidden beings a non-terrestrial origin; citing the extravagant books of Charles Fort with
their claims that voyagers from other worlds and outer space have often visited earth. Most
of my foes, however, were merely romanticists who insisted on trying to transfer to real life
the fantastic lore of lurking “little people” made popular by the magnificent horror-fiction
of Arthur Machen.
II.
As was only natural under the circumstances, this piquant debating finally
got into print in the form of letters to the Arkham Advertiser; some of which were copied
in the press of those Vermont regions whence the flood-stories came. The Rutland Herald
gave half a page of extracts from the letters on both sides, while the Brattleboro Reformer
reprinted one of my long historical and mythological summaries in full, with some accompanying
comments in “The Pendrifter’s” thoughtful column which supported and applauded
my sceptical conclusions. By the spring of 1928 I was almost a well-known figure in Vermont,
notwithstanding the fact that I had never set foot in the state. Then came the challenging letters
from Henry Akeley which impressed me so profoundly, and which took me for the first and last
time to that fascinating realm of crowded green precipices and muttering forest streams.
Most of what I now know of Henry Wentworth Akeley was gathered by correspondence
with his neighbours, and with his only son in California, after my experience in his lonely
farmhouse. He was, I discovered, the last representative on his home soil of a long, locally
distinguished line of jurists, administrators, and gentlemen-agriculturists. In him, however,
the family mentally had veered away from practical affairs to pure scholarship; so that he had
been a notable student of mathematics, astronomy, biology, anthropology, and folklore at the
University of Vermont. I had never previously heard of him, and he did not give many autobiographical
details in his communications; but from the first I saw he was a man of character, education,
and intelligence, albeit a recluse with very little worldly sophistication.
Despite the incredible nature of what he claimed, I could not help at once
taking Akeley more seriously than I had taken any of the other challengers of my views. For
one thing, he was really close to the actual phenomena—visible and tangible—that
he speculated so grotesquely about; and for another thing, he was amazingly willing to leave
his conclusions in a tentative state like a true man of science. He had no personal preferences
to advance, and was always guided by what he took to be solid evidence. Of course I began by
considering him mistaken, but gave him credit for being intelligently mistaken; and at no time
did I emulate some of his friends in attributing his ideas, and his fear of the lonely green
hills, to insanity. I could see that there was a great deal to the man, and knew that what he
reported must surely come from strange circumstances deserving investigation, however little
it might have to do with the fantastic causes he assigned. Later on I received from him certain
material proofs which placed the matter on a somewhat different and bewilderingly bizarre basis.
I cannot do better than transcribe in full, so far as is possible, the long
letter in which Akeley introduced himself, and which formed such an important landmark in my
own intellectual history. It is no longer in my possession, but my memory holds almost every
word of its portentous message; and again I affirm my confidence in the sanity of the man who
wrote it. Here is the text—a text which reached me in the cramped, archaic-looking scrawl
of one who had obviously not mingled much with the world during his sedate, scholarly life.





R.F.D. #2,
            Townshend, Windham Co.,
            Vermont.
            May 5, 1928.





Albert N. Wilmarth, Esq.,
118 Saltonstall St.,
Arkham, Mass.,

My dear Sir:—

I have read with great interest the Brattleboro Reformer’s reprint (Apr. 23, ’28)
of your letter on the recent stories of strange bodies seen floating in our flooded streams
last fall, and on the curious folklore they so well agree with. It is easy to see why an outlander
would take the position you take, and even why “Pendrifter” agrees with you. That
is the attitude generally taken by educated persons both in and out of Vermont, and was my own
attitude as a young man (I am now 57) before my studies, both general and in Davenport’s
book, led me to do some exploring in parts of the hills hereabouts not usually visited.
I was directed toward such studies by the queer old tales I used to hear from
elderly farmers of the more ignorant sort, but now I wish I had let the whole matter alone.
I might say, with all proper modesty, that the subject of anthropology and folklore is by no
means strange to me. I took a good deal of it at college, and am familiar with most of the standard
authorities such as Tylor, Lubbock, Frazer, Quatrefages, Murray, Osborn, Keith, Boule, G. Elliot
Smith, and so on. It is no news to me that tales of hidden races are as old as all mankind.
I have seen the reprints of letters from you, and those arguing with you, in the Rutland
Herald, and guess I know about where your controversy stands at the present time.
What I desire to say now is, that I am afraid your adversaries are nearer right
than yourself, even though all reason seems to be on your side. They are nearer right than they
realise themselves—for of course they go only by theory, and cannot know what I know.
If I knew as little of the matter as they, I would not feel justified in believing as they do.
I would be wholly on your side.
You can see that I am having a hard time getting to the point, probably because
I really dread getting to the point; but the upshot of the matter is that I have certain
evidence that monstrous things do indeed live in the woods on the high hills which nobody visits.
I have not seen any of the things floating in the rivers, as reported, but I have seen things
like them under circumstances I dread to repeat. I have seen footprints, and of late have
seen them nearer my own home (I live in the old Akeley place south of Townshend Village, on
the side of Dark Mountain) than I dare tell you now. And I have overheard voices in the woods
at certain points that I will not even begin to describe on paper.
At one place I heard them so much that I took a phonograph there—with
a dictaphone attachment and wax blank—and I shall try to arrange to have you hear the
record I got. I have run it on the machine for some of the old people up here, and one of the
voices had nearly scared them paralysed by reason of its likeness to a certain voice (that buzzing
voice in the woods which Davenport mentions) that their grandmothers have told about and mimicked
for them. I know what most people think of a man who tells about “hearing voices”—but
before you draw conclusions just listen to this record and ask some of the older backwoods people
what they think of it. If you can account for it normally, very well; but there must be something
behind it. Ex nihilo nihil fit, you know.
Now my object in writing you is not to start an argument, but to give you information
which I think a man of your tastes will find deeply interesting. This is private. Publicly
I am on your side, for certain things shew me that it does not do for people to know too
much about these matters. My own studies are now wholly private, and I would not think of saying
anything to attract people’s attention and cause them to visit the places I have explored.
It is true—terribly true—that there are non-human creatures watching us all the
time; with spies among us gathering information. It is from a wretched man who, if he was
sane (as I think he was), was one of those spies, that I got a large part of my clues
to the matter. He later killed himself, but I have reason to think there are others now.
The things come from another planet, being able to live in interstellar
space and fly through it on clumsy, powerful wings which have a way of resisting the ether
but which are too poor at steering to be of much use in helping them about on earth. I will
tell you about this later if you do not dismiss me at once as a madman. They come here to get
metals from mines that go deep under the hills, and I think I know where they come from.
They will not hurt us if we let them alone, but no one can say what will happen if we get too
curious about them. Of course a good army of men could wipe out their mining colony. That is
what they are afraid of. But if that happened, more would come from outside—any
number of them. They could easily conquer the earth, but have not tried so far because they
have not needed to. They would rather leave things as they are to save bother.
I think they mean to get rid of me because of what I have discovered. There
is a great black stone with unknown hieroglyphics half worn away which I found in the woods
on Round Hill, east of here; and after I took it home everything became different. If they think
I suspect too much they will either kill me or take me off the earth to where they come from.
They like to take away men of learning once in a while, to keep informed on the state of things
in the human world.
This leads me to my secondary purpose in addressing you—namely, to urge
you to hush up the present debate rather than give it more publicity. People must be kept
away from these hills, and in order to effect this, their curiosity ought not to be aroused
any further. Heaven knows there is peril enough anyway, with promoters and real estate men flooding
Vermont with herds of summer people to overrun the wild places and cover the hills with cheap
bungalows.
I shall welcome further communication with you, and shall try to send you that
phonograph record and black stone (which is so worn that photographs don’t shew much)
by express if you are willing. I say “try” because I think those creatures have
a way of tampering with things around here. There is a sullen, furtive fellow named Brown, on
a farm near the village, who I think is their spy. Little by little they are trying to cut me
off from our world because I know too much about their world.
They have the most amazing way of finding out what I do. You may not even get
this letter. I think I shall have to leave this part of the country and go to live with my son
in San Diego, Cal., if things get any worse, but it is not easy to give up the place you were
born in, and where your family has lived for six generations. Also, I would hardly dare sell
this house to anybody now that the creatures have taken notice of it. They seem to be
trying to get the black stone back and destroy the phonograph record, but I shall not let them
if I can help it. My great police dogs always hold them back, for there are very few here as
yet, and they are clumsy in getting about. As I have said, their wings are not much use for
short flights on earth. I am on the very brink of deciphering that stone—in a very terrible
way—and with your knowledge of folklore you may be able to supply missing links enough
to help me. I suppose you know all about the fearful myths antedating the coming of man to the
earth—the Yog-Sothoth and Cthulhu cycles—which are hinted at in the Necronomicon.
I had access to a copy of that once, and hear that you have one in your college library under
lock and key.
To conclude, Mr. Wilmarth, I think that with our respective studies we can
be very useful to each other. I don’t wish to put you in any peril, and suppose I ought
to warn you that possession of the stone and the record won’t be very safe; but I think
you will find any risks worth running for the sake of knowledge. I will drive down to Newfane
or Brattleboro to send whatever you authorise me to send, for the express offices there are
more to be trusted. I might say that I live quite alone now, since I can’t keep hired
help any more. They won’t stay because of the things that try to get near the house at
night, and that keep the dogs barking continually. I am glad I didn’t get as deep as this
into the business while my wife was alive, for it would have driven her mad.
Hoping that I am not bothering you unduly, and that you will decide to get
in touch with me rather than throw this letter into the waste basket as a madman’s raving,
I am

Yrs. very truly,
HENRY W. AKELEY

P.S. I am making some extra prints of certain photographs taken by me, which I think will help
to prove a number of the points I have touched on. The old people think they are monstrously
true. I shall send you these very soon if you are interested. H.W.A.
It would be difficult to describe my sentiments upon reading this strange document
for the first time. By all ordinary rules, I ought to have laughed more loudly at these extravagances
than at the far milder theories which had previously moved me to mirth; yet something in the
tone of the letter made me take it with paradoxical seriousness. Not that I believed for a moment
in the hidden race from the stars which my correspondent spoke of; but that, after some grave
preliminary doubts, I grew to feel oddly sure of his sanity and sincerity, and of his confrontation
by some genuine though singular and abnormal phenomenon which he could not explain except in
this imaginative way. It could not be as he thought it, I reflected, yet on the other hand it
could not be otherwise than worthy of investigation. The man seemed unduly excited and alarmed
about something, but it was hard to think that all cause was lacking. He was so specific and
logical in certain ways—and after all, his yarn did fit in so perplexingly well with some
of the old myths—even the wildest Indian legends.
That he had really overheard disturbing voices in the hills, and had really
found the black stone he spoke about, was wholly possible despite the crazy inferences he had
made—inferences probably suggested by the man who had claimed to be a spy of the outer
beings and had later killed himself. It was easy to deduce that this man must have been wholly
insane, but that he probably had a streak of perverse outward logic which made the naive Akeley—already
prepared for such things by his folklore studies—believe his tale. As for the latest developments—it
appeared from his inability to keep hired help that Akeley’s humbler rustic neighbours
were as convinced as he that his house was besieged by uncanny things at night. The dogs really
barked, too.
And then the matter of that phonograph record, which I could not but believe
he had obtained in the way he said. It must mean something; whether animal noises deceptively
like human speech, or the speech of some hidden, night-haunting human being decayed to a state
not much above that of lower animals. From this my thoughts went back to the black hieroglyphed
stone, and to speculations upon what it might mean. Then, too, what of the photographs which
Akeley said he was about to send, and which the old people had found so convincingly terrible?
As I re-read the cramped handwriting I felt as never before that my credulous
opponents might have more on their side than I had conceded. After all, there might be some
queer and perhaps hereditarily misshapen outcasts in those shunned hills, even though no such
race of star-born monsters as folklore claimed. And if there were, then the presence of strange
bodies in the flooded streams would not be wholly beyond belief. Was it too presumptuous to
suppose that both the old legends and the recent reports had this much of reality behind them?
But even as I harboured these doubts I felt ashamed that so fantastic a piece of bizarrerie
as Henry Akeley’s wild letter had brought them up.
In the end I answered Akeley’s letter, adopting a tone of friendly interest
and soliciting further particulars. His reply came almost by return mail; and contained, true
to promise, a number of kodak views of scenes and objects illustrating what he had to tell.
Glancing at these pictures as I took them from the envelope, I felt a curious sense of fright
and nearness to forbidden things; for in spite of the vagueness of most of them, they had a
damnably suggestive power which was intensified by the fact of their being genuine photographs—actual
optical links with what they portrayed, and the product of an impersonal transmitting process
without prejudice, fallibility, or mendacity.
The more I looked at them, the more I saw that my serious estimate of Akeley
and his story had not been unjustified. Certainly, these pictures carried conclusive evidence
of something in the Vermont hills which was at least vastly outside the radius of our common
knowledge and belief. The worst thing of all was the footprint—a view taken where the
sun shone on a mud patch somewhere in a deserted upland. This was no cheaply counterfeited thing,
I could see at a glance; for the sharply defined pebbles and grass-blades in the field of vision
gave a clear index of scale and left no possibility of a tricky double exposure. I have called
the thing a “footprint”, but “claw-print” would be a better term. Even
now I can scarcely describe it save to say that it was hideously crab-like, and that there seemed
to be some ambiguity about its direction. It was not a very deep or fresh print, but seemed
to be about the size of an average man’s foot. From a central pad, pairs of saw-toothed
nippers projected in opposite directions—quite baffling as to function, if indeed the
whole object were exclusively an organ of locomotion.
Another photograph—evidently a time-exposure taken in deep shadow—was
of the mouth of a woodland cave, with a boulder of rounded regularity choking the aperture.
On the bare ground in front of it one could just discern a dense network of curious tracks,
and when I studied the picture with a magnifier I felt uneasily sure that the tracks were like
the one in the other view. A third picture shewed a druid-like circle of standing stones on
the summit of a wild hill. Around the cryptic circle the grass was very much beaten down and
worn away, though I could not detect any footprints even with the glass. The extreme remoteness
of the place was apparent from the veritable sea of tenantless mountains which formed the background
and stretched away toward a misty horizon.
But if the most disturbing of all the views was that of the footprint, the
most curiously suggestive was that of the great black stone found in the Round Hill woods. Akeley
had photographed it on what was evidently his study table, for I could see rows of books and
a bust of Milton in the background. The thing, as nearly as one might guess, had faced the camera
vertically with a somewhat irregularly curved surface of one by two feet; but to say anything
definite about that surface, or about the general shape of the whole mass, almost defies the
power of language. What outlandish geometrical principles had guided its cutting—for artificially
cut it surely was—I could not even begin to guess; and never before had I seen anything
which struck me as so strangely and unmistakably alien to this world. Of the hieroglyphics on
the surface I could discern very few, but one or two that I did see gave me rather a shock.
Of course they might be fraudulent, for others besides myself had read the monstrous and abhorred
Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred; but it nevertheless made me shiver to recognise
certain ideographs which study had taught me to link with the most blood-curdling and blasphemous
whispers of things that had had a kind of mad half-existence before the earth and the other
inner worlds of the solar system were made.
Of the five remaining pictures, three were of swamp and hill scenes which seemed
to bear traces of hidden and unwholesome tenancy. Another was of a queer mark in the ground
very near Akeley’s house, which he said he had photographed the morning after a night
on which the dogs had barked more violently than usual. It was very blurred, and one could really
draw no certain conclusions from it; but it did seem fiendishly like that other mark or claw-print
photographed on the deserted upland. The final picture was of the Akeley place itself; a trim
white house of two stories and attic, about a century and a quarter old, and with a well-kept
lawn and stone-bordered path leading up to a tastefully carved Georgian doorway. There were
several huge police dogs on the lawn, squatting near a pleasant-faced man with a close-cropped
grey beard whom I took to be Akeley himself—his own photographer, one might infer from
the tube-connected bulb in his right hand.
From the pictures I turned to the bulky, closely written letter itself; and
for the next three hours was immersed in a gulf of unutterable horror. Where Akeley had given
only outlines before, he now entered into minute details; presenting long transcripts of words
overheard in the woods at night, long accounts of monstrous pinkish forms spied in thickets
at twilight on the hills, and a terrible cosmic narrative derived from the application of profound
and varied scholarship to the endless bygone discourses of the mad self-styled spy who had killed
himself. I found myself faced by names and terms that I had heard elsewhere in the most hideous
of connexions—Yuggoth, Great Cthulhu, Tsathoggua, Yog-Sothoth, R’lyeh, Nyarlathotep,
Azathoth, Hastur, Yian, Leng, the Lake of Hali, Bethmoora, the Yellow Sign, L’mur-Kathulos,
Bran, and the Magnum Innominandum—and was drawn back through nameless aeons and inconceivable
dimensions to worlds of elder, outer entity at which the crazed author of the Necronomicon
had only guessed in the vaguest way. I was told of the pits of primal life, and of the streams
that had trickled down therefrom; and finally, of the tiny rivulet from one of those streams
which had become entangled with the destinies of our own earth.
My brain whirled; and where before I had attempted to explain things away,
I now began to believe in the most abnormal and incredible wonders. The array of vital evidence
was damnably vast and overwhelming; and the cool, scientific attitude of Akeley—an attitude
removed as far as imaginable from the demented, the fanatical, the hysterical, or even the extravagantly
speculative—had a tremendous effect on my thought and judgment. By the time I laid the
frightful letter aside I could understand the fears he had come to entertain, and was ready
to do anything in my power to keep people away from those wild, haunted hills. Even now, when
time has dulled the impression and made me half question my own experience and horrible doubts,
there are things in that letter of Akeley’s which I would not quote, or even form into
words on paper. I am almost glad that the letter and record and photographs are gone now—and
I wish, for reasons I shall soon make clear, that the new planet beyond Neptune had not been
discovered.
With the reading of that letter my public debating about the Vermont horror
permanently ended. Arguments from opponents remained unanswered or put off with promises, and
eventually the controversy petered out into oblivion. During late May and June I was in constant
correspondence with Akeley; though once in a while a letter would be lost, so that we would
have to retrace our ground and perform considerable laborious copying. What we were trying to
do, as a whole, was to compare notes in matters of obscure mythological scholarship and arrive
at a clearer correlation of the Vermont horrors with the general body of primitive world legend.
For one thing, we virtually decided that these morbidities and the hellish
Himalayan Mi-Go were one and the same order of incarnated nightmare. There were also
absorbing zoölogical conjectures, which I would have referred to Professor Dexter in my
own college but for Akeley’s imperative command to tell no one of the matter before us.
If I seem to disobey that command now, it is only because I think that at this stage a warning
about those farther Vermont hills—and about those Himalayan peaks which bold explorers
are more and more determined to ascend—is more conducive to public safety than silence
would be. One specific thing we were leading up to was a deciphering of the hieroglyphics on
that infamous black stone—a deciphering which might well place us in possession of secrets
deeper and more dizzying than any formerly known to man.
III.
Toward the end of June the phonograph record came—shipped from Brattleboro,
since Akeley was unwilling to trust conditions on the branch line north of there. He had begun
to feel an increased sense of espionage, aggravated by the loss of some of our letters; and
said much about the insidious deeds of certain men whom he considered tools and agents of the
hidden beings. Most of all he suspected the surly farmer Walter Brown, who lived alone on a
run-down hillside place near the deep woods, and who was often seen loafing around corners in
Brattleboro, Bellows Falls, Newfane, and South Londonderry in the most inexplicable and seemingly
unmotivated way. Brown’s voice, he felt convinced, was one of those he had overheard on
a certain occasion in a very terrible conversation; and he had once found a footprint or claw-print
near Brown’s house which might possess the most ominous significance. It had been curiously
near some of Brown’s own footprints—footprints that faced toward it.
So the record was shipped from Brattleboro, whither Akeley drove in his Ford
car along the lonely Vermont back roads. He confessed in an accompanying note that he was beginning
to be afraid of those roads, and that he would not even go into Townshend for supplies now except
in broad daylight. It did not pay, he repeated again and again, to know too much unless one
were very remote from those silent and problematical hills. He would be going to California
pretty soon to live with his son, though it was hard to leave a place where all one’s
memories and ancestral feelings centred.
Before trying the record on the commercial machine which I borrowed from the
college administration building I carefully went over all the explanatory matter in Akeley’s
various letters. This record, he had said, was obtained about 1 a.m. on the first of May, 1915,
near the closed mouth of a cave where the wooded west slope of Dark Mountain rises out of Lee’s
Swamp. The place had always been unusually plagued with strange voices, this being the reason
he had brought the phonograph, dictaphone, and blank in expectation of results. Former experience
had told him that May-Eve—the hideous Sabbat-night of underground European legend—would
probably be more fruitful than any other date, and he was not disappointed. It was noteworthy,
though, that he never again heard voices at that particular spot.
Unlike most of the overheard forest voices, the substance of the record was
quasi-ritualistic, and included one palpably human voice which Akeley had never been able to
place. It was not Brown’s, but seemed to be that of a man of greater cultivation. The
second voice, however, was the real crux of the thing—for this was the accursed buzzing
which had no likeness to humanity despite the human words which it uttered in good English grammar
and a scholarly accent.
The recording phonograph and dictaphone had not worked uniformly well, and
had of course been at a great disadvantage because of the remote and muffled nature of the overheard
ritual; so that the actual speech secured was very fragmentary. Akeley had given me a transcript
of what he believed the spoken words to be, and I glanced through this again as I prepared the
machine for action. The text was darkly mysterious rather than openly horrible, though a knowledge
of its origin and manner of gathering gave it all the associative horror which any words could
well possess. I will present it here in full as I remember it—and I am fairly confident
that I know it correctly by heart, not only from reading the transcript, but from playing the
record itself over and over again. It is not a thing which one might readily forget!


(INDISTINGUISHABLE SOUNDS)

(A CULTIVATED MALE HUMAN VOICE)

. . . is the Lord of the Woods, even to . . .
and the gifts of the men of Leng . . . so from the wells of night to the gulfs
of space, and from the gulfs of space to the wells of night, ever the praises of Great Cthulhu,
of Tsathoggua, and of Him Who is not to be Named. Ever Their praises, and abundance to the Black
Goat of the Woods. Iä! Shub-Niggurath! The Goat with a Thousand Young!

(A BUZZING IMITATION OF HUMAN SPEECH)

Iä! Shub-Niggurath! The Black Goat of the Woods with a Thousand Young!

(HUMAN VOICE)

And it has come to pass that the Lord of the Woods, being . . .
seven and nine, down the onyx steps . . . (tri)butes to Him in the Gulf, Azathoth,
He of Whom Thou hast taught us marv(els) . . . on the wings of night out beyond space,
out beyond th . . . to That whereof Yuggoth is the youngest child, rolling alone
in black aether at the rim. . . .

(BUZZING VOICE)

. . . go out among men and find the ways thereof, that He in
the Gulf may know. To Nyarlathotep, Mighty Messenger, must all things be told. And He shall
put on the semblance of men, the waxen mask and the robe that hides, and come down from the
world of Seven Suns to mock. . . .

(HUMAN VOICE)

. . . (Nyarl)athotep, Great Messenger, bringer of strange joy to Yuggoth through the
void, Father of the Million Favoured Ones, Stalker among. . . .

(SPEECH CUT OFF BY END OF RECORD)