November, 1997.


Anna took a deep breath of salty air as the first raindrops began to spatter the pavement, and the swollen, slate-colored clouds that blanketed the sky muttered ominous portents amongst themselves over the little coastal town of Anchorhead.

Squinting up into the glowering storm, she wondered how everything managed to happen so fast. The strange phone call over a month ago, from a lawyer claiming to represent the estate of some distant branch of Michael's family, was bewildering enough in itself... but then the sudden whirlwind of planning and decisions, legal details and travel arrangements, the packing up and shipping away of her entire home, her entire life...

Now suddenly there she was, after driving for the past two days straight, over a thousand miles away from the familiar warmth of Texas, getting ready to move into the ancestral mansion of a clan of relatives so far removed that not even Michael had ever heard of them. And she'd only been married since June and none of this was any of her idea in the first place, and already it's starting to rain.

These days, Anna often found herself feeling confused and uprooted.

She shook herself and forced the melancholy thoughts from her head, trying to focus on the errand at hand. She was to meet with the real estate agent and pick up the keys to their new house while Michael ran across town to take care of some paperwork at the university. He would be back to pick Anna up in a few minutes, and then the two of them could begin the long, precarious process of settling in.

A sullen belch emanated from the clouds, and the rain started coming down harder -- fat, cold drops smacking loudly against the cobblestones. Shouldn't it be snowing in New England at this time of year? With a sigh, Anna open her umbrella.

Welcome to Anchorhead...

She stood outside the real estate office. A grim little cul-de-sac, tucked away in a corner of the claustrophobic tangle of narrow, twisting avenues that largely constituted the older portion of Anchorhead. Like most of the streets in this city, it was ancient, shadowy, and lead essentially nowhere. The lane ended there at the real estate agent's office and wound its way back toward the center of town. A narrow, garbage-choked alley opened up nearby.

